a senior political analyst one of the
key elements of this of course is one of
precedent and albeit that this is
ultimately is going to be an advisory
opinion as we've been hearing just from
Bernard but also from our previous guest
as well our legal expert um there is no
question that this is going to have some
sort of ramification for cases going
forward absolutely especially on the
parts uh that we will be discussed uh
later and will have to be deliberated on
by the court the aspects of such as the
apartate is there an a regime of
apartate going on on the occupied
territories and what does that mean
because when that was judged so in the
case of South Africa it had huge
ramifications right and that goes to the
sort of to the to the nature of what
we're witnessing today because I'm not
sure if you notice I'm going to I'm
going to sound maybe anticlimax a bit
our viewers around the world who've been
watching us the past almost two decades
Must Be Wondering
what is this I mean what are we watching
how could Israel's six decades
occupation be
legal why are we discussing the
illegality of Israel occupation can be
can such a system of Violence by one
people against another people that goes
on for decades be
legal can one country steal the land of
another people and settle on it be legal
so why are we discussing it why are the
Palestinians appealing to the icj to get
a ruling that is obvious to everyone
around the world we're reporting on it
for God's sakes every day it's because
of what you just asked it's because when
you set it up in legal terms when the
illegitimate becomes by letter and
spirit
illegal then there will be ramifications
and imp implications when other
organization other countries such as
take for example European Union if the
European Union that has a favorite trade
relations with Israel and now the icj
came out with a ruling says the occupied
30s are illegal occupied Israel
practices an aparted regime a crime
against humanity against the
Palestinians would you really want to
continue with your preferred trade
status with with Israel would you want
to provide it with arms so this legal
precedent as such is hugely important I
want to ask you about that because a few
days ago we saw a court in the
Netherlands which upheld a ruling which
said that the Dutch government could not
supply parts for F-35 fighters to Israel
now Paul rler himself the legal expert
we heard just speaking before we we uh
they broke for um the the intermission
was calling out the US saying that the
US has repeatedly supported Israel in
its actions of course the US is a major
supplier of arms to Israel if the the
ruling goes against Israel isn't it
incumbent legally is there not at least
an obligation as you were saying on
those countries who are ostensibly
supporting Israel in its actions to stop
doing it and what implications do you
think that would have for the US it
certainly would have ramifications on
some more than others right because we
you going to see someone like the United
States uh you know go as we heard them
before with the South African case at
icj say this is meritless this is
baseless we don't want to discuss it now
it's counterproductive it's in fact
interfering in our effort to help
resolve the Israel Palestine issue and
so on so forth but I think the idea that
the icj would come out a ruling and it
will be nuanced not simply that the six
decades occupation is illegal but the
fact that a parted regime which once
again there's precedence on it on the
question of South Africa crime against
humanity is practiced every day in East
Jerusalem as well as in the West Bank
and Gaza and so so forth this will have
ramifications across the board some
countries will be able to withstand it
more than others but some countries have
already been taken uh precautions for
example the United States has considered
generally speaking settlements on the
West Bank to be illegal at one point
then as they said they start saying they
are problematic and then uh you know
they they're not helpful and and so on
so forth but generally speaking the
United States has taken the position
that settlements are illegal and hence
every time they give Aid to Israel they
underline that this should not go to the
West Bank settlements and so on so forth
but de facto it does dour it does
because now in the West Bank there are
these illegal Jewish settlements that
are directly supported by the Israeli
government directly financed by the
Israeli government there are educational
institutions in the settlements that are
directly supported by the Israeli
government so this is not just a bunch
of Israeli citizens radicals extremists
or whatever taking off and settling in
the West Bank the project of settlement
in the West Bank the bypass roads that
we just heard about the bypass roads the
aparted roads that Jews can get on
Palestinians cannot get on the apartheid
wall that this court has made a judgment
on back in 2004 that it is
illegal in the occupied West Bank right
all of that will have implications on
the on the intermediate and long run I
want to ask you about that because one
of the the uh words that um Israel
invariably comes back to when it defends
itself in cases like this is that these
lands are disputed and therefore there
cannot be no annexation because these
lands are under dispute and there needs
to be a resolution of that dispute if we
get if there is a result from this court
that is in favor of the Palestinian case
in in favor of Thea that has brought
this action where does that leave
Israel's defense of these are disputed
lands well to be clear and this is
actually an important point point you
rais this court is not judging whether
the occupied territories are occupied or
disputed they are occupied here we're
not hearing a debate on whether they are
disputed or occupied Israel can make the
claim it wants and it does it makes
outrageous claims huge lies non-stop for
50 plus years because at the United
Nations security
Council on a number of
occasions the nature of Israel's
presence on the occupied territories how
was deemed as occupation there is no
dispute over over the fact that Israel
occupies the West Bank Gaza and East
Jerusalem except in the minds of certain
Israelis and not all Israelis of certain
Israelis so Israel makes claims but
those claims are not in line with the
International Community with
international law as transpired at the
United Nations General Assembly and the
United Nations security Council what the
court is going to be deliberating on
that this occupation this military
occupation has not gone on for 5 years
10 years 15 years 20 25 30 35 it's G on
for 56 years and guess what what we've
just heard before in the latest argument
by RoR is that Israel intends to make it
permanent that everything about Israel's
settlements project that justifies the
presence of Israeli
military on the occupied territories
everything thing about that settlement
project makes it an annexation de facto
and dour by Israel and hence this
occupation becomes annexation and hence
it's
illegal right so it's not it's not the
question whether Israel occupies is
whether this occupation is legal for a
certain amount of time what they are
showing is that Israel has had and has
every intention to prolong this
occupation as long as possible to make
it def facto annexation and hence it is
illegal that you cannot go on occupying
another people for over than over than
five decades and still say well you know
it's just temporary it might go on for
another 50 years another 100 years 200
years it's always temporary no this is
not temporary because everything about
it everything about it looks permanent
especially when you move in de facto by
Design
communities Jewish communities on those
occupied territories you conf confiscate
land illegally from Palestinians living
on those lands and you give it to the
Jews that are legally illegally settling
there and you have one generation after
another Generation Now of illegal
settlers and when they showed us the
diagram there we saw how I remember for
example when the so-called peace process
started in 1991 in Madrid we had
something like 75,000
settlers 75,000 settlers today today
there are 700,000 settlers including
East Jerusalem there's about 500,000 in
the occupied West Bank Plus around
200,000 Plus in East Jerusalem so there
are unoccupied territories after
1967 some
700,000 settlers illegal settlers which
means it doubled 10 times since
1991 in terms of the Imp implications
and the ramifications of the ripple
effect if you like of of whatever ruling
is eventually made if it is made in
favor of of the unga case brought on
behalf of the
Palestinians what kind of impact do you
think is that going to have on cases
that are brought before the
international criminal court or the um
the Human Rights Council for example we
should specify that the icj is there in
order to facilitate issues between
States but the international criminal
court see here's cases which are
directed towards individuals what's the
knock on effect of this going to be if
it is um if the ruling goes against
Israel despite the fact I'm no legal
scholar but um logically right and from
the record from history that I that I've
read as a student of this conflict of
this issue of this apart a of this
occupation is that there is a domino
effect and that there is relationship
there is synergy between one and another
whenever one ruling comes out it becomes
precedent and it's used on another
ruling and clearly what we see now from
the uh from the claims made by the
lawyers is that if you notice their
their their arguments are based on
either the United Nations have come up
with United Nations resolution Security
Council General Assembly the 2004
non-binding Court opinion the icj back
then and so on and so forth so there's
you always build precedence and you
always build arguments and those
arguments accumulate and one argument
then can help in another Court over
another argument and yes we do move from
the court like the icj that discusses
issues of between states to the ICC to
the international criminal court where
you discuss more the responsibility for
example of Israeli leaders of Israeli
generals who have been responsible for
war crimes where orders were were were
given where people died were killed in
war that we know that was in every
possible aspect of its execution was
illegal so I think Israelis Israeli
leaders should worry moving forward not
that they will end up in prison or in or
in the haue because they are
unfortunately contined to be shielded by
the United States as we've heard in the
arguments earlier but I think once again
they will be exposed more and more to
local
legal processes like we've seen in
Holland like we've seen in the UK and
other places before whereby you will see
more and more Israeli leaders war
criminals being uh looked into
investigated and perhaps
arrested